---
layout: post
title:  "Hotspot JVM's Fast Locking"
date:   2024-06-25 15:54:13 +0200
categories: jvm concurrency
---

# Introduction

This article describes how the hotspot JVM implements fast locking, an type
of locking that is optimized to add as little overhead as possible when a single 
thread tries to acquire the lock for an object. 

Note that as soon as multiple threads compete to acquire the lock for an object
the lock is promoted to a full monitor. In Hotspot it's common to refer to this process
as inflating a monitor. It's also common to refer to the type of lock that is used
to implement fast locking as *thin locks* and to full monitors as *fat locks*.

Thin locking also doesn't cover `await / notify / notifyAll`, thin locks are inflated
when multiple threads rely on those methods to cooperate.

See [Locks & Java Synchronized]() for an introduction to locks in the JVM and some of
its characteristics like `reentrancy` (aka in the code as `recursiveness`) and the abscence
of `fairness` in the case of the `synchronized` keyword.

# Historical evolution of fast locking

Before thin locking, fast locking relied on a monitor cache that had to be locked before performing certain operations to avoid
race conditions. On top of it, the monitor added significant space overhead when a large number of object monitors
were created.

According to the paper [Thin locks: featherweight synchronization for Java][thin-locks-paper], 
thin locking was first implemented for IBM’s version of the JDK 1.1.2 for AIX. 
Thin locking that is described in the aforementioned paper, brought fast locking by relying on using a part of
the object header to contain:

- A flag that indicated whether an object was locked / unlocked.
- A pointer to the stack of the thread that was holding the lock in case of non-contention or a pointer to the object monitor in case of contention.
- A count to reflect the number of times that the same thread has acquired an object lock.

Then biased locking was introduced to avoid having to reduce the need to always run a compare-and-swap (aka CAS) operation whenever the same
thread was trying to acquire a lock that it was already holding. However biased locking introduced unnecessary complexity and 
[JEP-374][jep-374] was created to deprecate it.

Recently the implementation of thin locks have been challenged by project Lilliput, a project focused on reducing the
memory footprint of objects in the heap by reducing the size of object headers. The previous thin locking implementation
had several drawbacks:

- It used a significant amount of bits in the object header for locking, while most objects are never used for locking purposes.
- It made it difficult to add changes to the object header layout, because the same bits in the object header could sometimes be unused,
sometimes point to the stack of the thread holding the lock or in the case of a fat lock could hold a pointer to the object monitor.

An explanation of the reasoning behind the changes to locking introduced by project Lilliput, is also provided in this presentation: 
[Project Lilliput - Compact Object Headers][project-lilliput]. 

# Representation of Objects in the JVM

I will describe the most recent implementation of fast locking, that is the default implementation when the JVM is started with no flags. 

The code for the previous implementation still exists, it is just hidden behind the *LM_LEGACY* locking mode.

- CAS to know if a monitor is locked / unlock
- Real question that the JVM needs to answer is: Is the current thread holding the lock ? 
    - The answer comes from the fact that the JVM's JavaThread object holds a stack of objects that is holding the lock for.
    - What about support for virtual threads ?
- No support for recursion (as of June 2024 - fallback to full monitor - support upcoming)

# Glossary

- **Contention**: a situation where multiple threads compete to acquire a lock.
- **Thin lock**: 
- **Fat lock**: 

# References

In the abscence of contention, the original implementation before the changes brought by Lilliput did the following:

- Make a copy of the existing header in the stack. Stack here refers to the thread stack. The copy of the header is known as the displaced header.
- compare-and-swap to see if the object header is ewas unlocked. If it was, set the   
-
}

[thin-locks-paper]: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/277650.277734
[jep-374]: https://openjdk.org/jeps/374 
[project-lilliput]: https://fosdem.org/2024/schedule/event/fosdem-2024-3015-project-lilliput-compact-object-headers/
